Welcome back, in this video we are going to
put together a simple touch control system,
really exciting stuff. It's going to be web
and mobile compatible. We're going to start
by refactoring Ball.cs to include a public
launch method that can be called from the
outside; we're going to write DragLaunch.cs
component and add it to the ball, we're going
to wire up the user interface's panel that
we just created and make events send messages
through to DragLaunch.cs which will in return
launch the ball and then we'll test that the
whole thing works.
So the first thing that we want to do is to
take a look at Ball.cs and I'm going to ask
you to do some refactoring. So Ball.cs, we
were just getting going at this point right?
Clearly we're going to want to launch the
ball more than once right? So having the actual
launch here happen inside the start section
here is fine for testing but it's time to
refactor that out into a public launch method
that takes in a launch velocity. We also at
launch want the ball to float in the air until
we launch so we want to turn gravity off for
the ball until the launch and then turn it
back on at launch;
and that's really about it. So here's your
challenge for this video, I want you to do
the refactoring of Ball.cs. Separate the launch
code into a public method, use the signature
launch (Vector3 velocity) for that; it should
be public launch Vector3 velocity; as a hint,
rigidBody.useGravity = false, set that on
start so the ball doesn't just fall out of
the sky; and then the moment that we do launch
inside the launch method use rigidBody.useGravity
= true and then test that it all works by
just calling it on the start method so this
is just a straight refactor. Ball.cs should
still continue to work once you've done this
but crucially we will have a public method
that will allow us to access this from the
outside.
So, go ahead and do that challenge now please.
OK fantastic, welcome back. Let's get on with
the refactoring of our Ball.cs. So we want
to take everything to do with launching the
ball i.e. the stuff that I've highlighted
and put it in another method. So you right
click and say refactor extract method. You
can use the cursor key to say where you want
to extract it, I'm going to put it here, and
then I'm just going to call it launch. Fantastic,
we don't actually need an update message so
let's just remove that.
Now I said that the signature of launch wanted
to take in a Vector3 velocity so let's do
that and then let's put the same thing here
so of course we don't use Vector3 on the call,
we just pass in something called velocity
which doesn't exist yet and then the method
accepts a variable called velocity of type
Vector3. There we go. So the rigidBody's velocity
becomes the launch velocity. Now I also said
that I wanted to disable gravity so rigidBody.useGravity
equals false here so it doesn't fall out of
the sky, and then on launch we are going to
use exactly the same thing and make it true;
and then we'll do stuff with audio. I'm just
putting space in to separate it out. So we
are nearly there, we just need to actually
provide a velocity, well let's just pass this
launch velocity through, I said that we wanted
Ball.cs to work in exactly the same way, it's
just a pure refactor for now. So launch velocity
it publicly exposed, it's available to the
start method so it gets passed in as a parameter
to the launch method. Of course this variable
name does not need to match this variable
name. So launch picks up velocity as a variable
name and then passes it into the rigid body's
velocity.
So in theory this Ball.cs will behave exactly
as it did before, and we'll be good to go.
Let's take a look. Good, OK? So it was just
a pure refactor. What the hell was the point
of it? The point of it was that we now have
a launch method that is public - did you spot
my error? Yes, good job. Public void launch,
so now from the outside we can call Ball.Launch
and we can provide a Vector3 and we are going
to be in good shape. Wonderful news. OK, so
what are we going to do next? We need a different
component on the ball.
Let's not control the ball's DragLaunch with
the same code right? Now this stuff is about
the ball, these are properties of the ball
and the ball's physics. Let's not convolute
the dragging into that, that's horrible. Let's
have a new component so create yourself a
new c# script and call it drag launch. Now
is that what I asked you to call it? I don't
know, let's take a look. Yes, write DragLaunch.cs
that's what we're going to be doing. Let's
go into DragLaunch and think about how that's
going to work. Right I'll get you started
on DragLaunch just a little bit and I'll set
up the outline parameters of it and then I'm
going to ask you to do the actual coding of
DragLaunch because this course is all about
learning how to do things by doing them.
Not just watching me do them and then typing
blindly because you don't learn anything like
that. Let me show you a few things that I
want to do. DragLaunch is going to act on
the ball so it's good practice here to require
component - open bracket close brackets close
square brackets, typeof Ball. So when I do
that, the DragLaunch component over in Unity,
when we drag it to the ball now if there wasn't
a Ball script now on this ball it would actually
add one. OK let's move this audioSource up
let's look at these two components together.
Is it really going to lose me the prefab connection?
Just because I'm moving an audioSource? OK
let's not move the audioSource, so we have
a Ball script with a launch velocity here
- soon it'll go because it will be our drag
that does it, and then we have a launch drag
script here, OK, and this drag script requires
the ball to be there to work on it. So let
me continue to build out the launch drag a
little bit for you. Private Ball ball. So
we're going to need access to a ball, so because
we are going to need access let's go find
it in the Start.
ball = GetComponent, why get component? Because
it's on the same game object right? This drag
script is here and it's looking for a component
of the same game object so it's get component,
using a generic format, of type ball. It's
a method so it needs curly brackets, and everything
needs a semi-colon, or it don't not work.
OK, we don't need an Update method, we're
not doing anything every frame on the drag
script, but what we are going to want are
a couple of things that our UI system can
talk into. Let's just write these now and
you will fill out their details.
They need to be public so that the UI system
can see them, and we want on the drag Start
to be able to call something called DragStart,
fantastic, and on the end we want to have
a DragEnd. Of course the word "start" has
to have a 't' on the end in case you didn't
know. OK fantastic so I'm going to put a couple
of comments in. What's going to happen on
DragStart? Well we're going to capture time
and position of drag start or mouse click.
OK, and what we're going to do at the end
is launch the ball. OK the rest of the details
will be in your challenge.
Crucially this drag launch now has two public
methods that it can call that's going to allow
it to respond to user interface now let's
look over in Unity at how we're going to wire
up our user interface and you are going to
write the rest of DragLaunch. So go to your
UI interface and your touch input panel which
is currently a very thin object, it's sitting
here, by thin I mean that it has no components
on it to speak of; it's got a rect transform
like all User Interface elements, it has a
canvas renderer but so what that just allows
you to see it. Not that we need to see it,
but it's there.
We need an image script otherwise this next
thing I'm going to add won't work. Now, add
component, go to UI, so we're adding a component
to our touch input panel in our UI canvas,
and have a look down, what have we got in
here that's of any interest? Do we have what
we're looking for in here? Well we're looking
for something that will allow us to actually
respond to a mouse input OK? So actually it's
under event, not UI, slightly counter-intuitively.
So you've got two menus that this could be
under, event or UI. It's actually in event
and then event trigger this is what we're
going to use. Event then event trigger.
So click on that, and you'll have an event
trigger script on your touch input. Now you
can say add new event type. You see pointer
down there? That's pointer down or your finger
down. When that happens, what are we going
to do? Well, add an object to call, drag the
ball in to here, you see what I'm doing I'm
dragging the ball instance from the hierarchy
into the pointer down event, and then if we
go to DragLaunch look we have that DragStart,
that's why we made a public method on DragStart
there, DragLaunch is a component of Ball and
we can call drag start. Fantastic, you can
guess what I'm going to do next. When the
pointer goes up, when your finger comes up
off the screen, what do we do?
It already knows that we want to talk to the
ball; it's assuming that we want to talk to
the ball. Awesome, so we just go to DragLaunch,
DragEnd. Now can you see what's happening
there when I click down at say the bottom
of the screen anywhere it's going to call
DragLaunch.DragStart and then when I let go
of the mouse OnMouseUp DragEnd gets called
and we will call the DragEnd method which
as I said is actually going to launch the
ball. So that's how we tie event triggers
from our interface into our script.
So you have everything that you need to succeed
now. So what are we going to do? I have a
challenge for you, here's your challenge.
Write DragLaunch.cs. So public DragStart will
store the time and position of the start of
the drag. The position as a vector3, the time
as a float. DragEnd will calculate the length
of the vector between the start drag point
and the end drag point and how long it took
to do it. Now remember that speed is distance
over time and try and launch the ball dependent
on the length and speed of the drag.
So this is a typical touch swipe interface.
The faster you swipe the faster the ball will
go and the direction of the swipe will determine
the direction of the ball. It should be quite
hard to make the ball go all the way down
to the end of the lane without going into
the gutter, that’s good, it's a bit like
bowling, and there should be no need for scaling
factors in x or y at the moment because on
most screen sizes you should find that this
will work out. Longer term we might want to
do things like that but try not having to
multiply anything just use default values
for everything, I think it'll work out for
you.
So hopefully you know what you need to do,
I want you at the end of this to be able to
click and drag anywhere on the screen, swiping
forward and the faster you swipe the faster
the ball launches and the ball will launch
in a direction that is relevant to the direction
that you swiped in on the screen. So straight
up the screen in the middle of the screen
from the bottom to the top would be a straight
ball, and if you swipe fast, it's fast. Go
ahead pause the video and do that challenge
now please.
OK so welcome back, let's make this drag system
work right? It's going to be a lot of fun.
So what do we need here in the DragLaunch.cs
script? Well for a start we're going to need
some private variables. We're going to need
the concept of a drag start and a drag end.
Now it happens that Unity reports a vector
3 for drag events even though mouse co-ordinates
only strictly need two co-ordinates so why
not flow with that and just use vector3s to
store them?
So we have a drag start and a drag end, now
we can declare multiple variables on one line
like that with a comma, I like to do that
when they're semantically very related. We
are also going to have a float, because time
is counted with a float. Basically if you
can count things on your fingers you use an
integer, and if you can't you use a float,
and then we worry about other data types like
doubles or whatever if and when we need them.
So we have a start time and an end time, right
let's keep things really simple. Nice clean
code. So the drag starts at a position, ends
at a position, starts at a time and ends at
a time right? Nice and simple. So what happens
on start here? Well we just get the ball component
because remember start only runs once when
the game starts running. So this is just a
way of finding the component that we need.
So on drag start when that user interface
element calls the DragStart method what do
we do?
Well the first thing that we need to do is
capture the drag start position and it's just
input.mousePosition and that's going to be
a pixel position; and we'd better capture
the start time. Now what does that equal?
Time.time. Now remember that you can look
up the Unity docs by going to the end of the
thing that you've typed and holding down control
or command and apostrophe; and that's a really
handy shortcut, that will bring up your documentation
and Time.time is the time since the game started
running taking into account any timescale
that we might be using.
So you can read all about that over here.
So that just takes in time as a float in seconds,
and that's all that we need to capture on
the start. We just need to capture where and
when we clicked. Launching the ball a little
bit more to do. Same deal at the beginning
though, we capture the DragEnd as the Input.mouseposition.
Perfect. Then we're going to need to capture
the end time right? So that's just Time.time
again because time has moved on at this point.
Great, so why don't we work out what the drag
duration is? Let's declare a new variable
only inside the scope of DragEnd because we
don't need it any more. Remember your general
principle; only make the scope of anything
as wide as it needs to be. It doesn't need
to be used outside this DragEnd method so
don't declare it outside of that.
dragDuration, nice long variable names. endTime
- startTime. Perfect, so now we have a duration
in seconds of how long the drag lasted. Using
spacing just to logically group these things.
So now there's one we need to think about.
We've got a float here, I'm going to call
it launchSpeedX in the x direction. Now, speed
is distance over time so we're going to have
some distance that the mouse has moved over
the drag duration which we just created.
Not sure why dragDuration is not auto-filling,
it's probably because there's nothing inside
these brackets so let's work out what's going
to go inside these brackets. So if speed is
distance, whatever's going to go inside these
brackets, over time then what's the distance
- how far has the mouse moved? Well, it's
dragEnd.x so the launch x velocity is going
to be related to the x axis - dragStart.x
Now let's go over in Unity and just have a
look at something.
That's OK, these warnings are fine, we here,
if you look at the co-ordinate system in the
top right here, when we drag we are going
to be moving the mouse in the x/y plane only,
no z. The x position when we drag is going
to relate to the x velocity. X will map to
x, so left and right on the screen will map
to left and right in the game space, fine;
but our y position up the screen when we swipe
will relate to the z velocity in the game,
right? So we're going to have a little bit
of a translation going on there or a 90 degree
translation. So the x is quite simple and
clear but the y is just as simple and clear
but it’s the z speed we're going to be launching
in the z direction, not y, is dragEnd.y
That's how we're going to do that translation.
Minus dragStart.y. Again speed is distance
over time. dragDuration; and the reason that
it wouldn't autocomplete before was because
these brackets were empty. Finally we compute
the Vector3 of the launch which is the launch
velocity. Let's go ahead and do that now.
So we're declaring a new variable, Vector3,
launchVelocity now remember that speeds are
scalars, they only have one number and that's
why they're a float. A velocity is a vector,
it needs to have three numbers in a three
dimensional space.
Launch velocity equals a new Vector3 so we're
going to construct a new Vector3 for the launch
velocity here and we're going to build it
up from the launch speed x, 0 in the y direction,
we don't want to fire the ball upwards at
all, we're assuming that we're firing it level
and then the launch speed z. That make sense?
That's how the x and z get translated from
the x and the y. Final thing that we need
to do is take that ball variable that we found
at the top here, now because we have a public
method called Launch, we can call Launch with
launchVelocity.
Look at that isn't that beautiful apart from
all of those funny characters I just typed.
Actually all of the code is on the screen
there. At the top are some private variables
that we need, we get the component, we record
on the start we record on the end and we do
a little bit of maths on the vectors. OK let's
go try it over in Unity, let's see what happens.
Now what's wrong? Why is it launching at the
start? Well if we look at the ball script
we just need to make a change on the ball
script, we don't need to be launching on start
over in the ball script so remove that launch
with launch velocity on start.
We also have an error here, there are two
audio listeners in the scene, please remove
one. Well our top camera came with an audio
listener so go to your top camera and remove
the audio listener component over in the inspector.
We only need one. Awesome let's do it again.
Swipe. Look at that! Perfect! Well, perfect,
gutter ball but the control system's perfect!
Let's try swiping slowly, it goes slowly.
Let's try and actually get it to the end,
swipe fast. It's really hard but it's about
right! It's supposed to be hard!
Look at this I'm going to hit it, I'm going
to hit it I'm going to hit it! Boom awesome!
OK the pins fall too slowly but that's because
of the physics, we're going to tweak that
later but look, the control system works.
Huge congratulations, you have just created
a swipe control system in unity that's going
to work both on the web and on mobile and
there's the code for you on the screen, the
majority of it anyway, I hope that you've
enjoyed this lecture, I hope that you've passed
the challenges - if you didn't and you needed
some help no problem at all and I will see
you soon.